---
layout: post
title: "On Job and the Unfairness of this World"
date: 2019-04-27
---

When I graduated from college, I had an extremely hard time finding a job as a chemical engineer. If you have ever been without a job you know that it can be zero-fun. If you went to Calvin, then you might have that little voice in the back of your head that whispers “God’s will” to everything that happens to you. 
I needed to find an example of faith and resiliency. Enter Job. 

Why Job? Because Sunday school that is why.

I am naturally impatient, so I went straight to the climax (chapters 38 to 42) because I needed answers. I expected that feeling of drinking cold water after a warm summer day run.
Instead I got the feeling of drinking cough syrup when you need got a sore throat. Some relief as it goes down but really you are going to have to wait a couple hours to feel better. 
In Chapters 38 and 39 we find a description of God’s portfolio where the creator lists several animals and points out how majestic they all are. Suddenly in chapters 40 and 41 we stumble upon Behemoth and Leviathan, respectively. They both feel out of place with the rest of creation. They do not add any beauty to the world. They do not leave me in awe – they make me want to run away.
Traditionally, these 4 chapters have been thought of as a continuous description of God’s creation. However, according to Robert Alter, American professor of Hebrew, the switch between common animals to these two specific beast is in itself a heightening in descriptions that indicates a heightening in argumentation. 
Kushner agrees with Alter and proposes that Behemoth and Leviathan are symbols for two natural forces found in creation that God himself must contend with.
In chapter 40 God challenges Job to dominate Behemoth and to do a better job than Him (Job 40: 13-14). The JPS says that only Behemoth’s creator can “make His sword to approach unto him” (Job 40:19), providing the image of a calculating hunter approaching the dangerous beast with both respect and menace. 
The Leviathan is discussed in chapter 41 and is also better documented in other cultures and the Bible. Biblical references include Psalms 74:13-14 and Isaiah 26: 21-25. Then there is Genesis 1:20-21, where God is said to have created the “great sea monsters” just as he created “all the living creatures of every kind.” 
Behemoth and Leviathan are both created by God—and both are dangerous creations that God keeps in check. And suddenly God’s self-defense is over.
Had Job ended in Chapter 39, God would have effectively left Job contemplating on the realization that he in fact has nothing to demand from God. Thankfully, the book does not end there. Chapters 40 and 41 describe a world in which God must actively intervene. Sure, Behemoth and Leviathan are both terrible creatures, but they are part of God’s good world. Without them he could not have this world run by itself. 
So, what are Behemoth and Leviathan supposed to mean to us? How is this supposed to make me feel better about not finding a job? Or not getting into the grad school I wanted? 
Well let’s see. 
Job 40:17 references Behemoth’s tail and says that its “as strong as a cedar.” This is a euphemism for the male sexual organ. We can interpret this as Behemoth being that primitive natural force in each of us that drives us forward. It is the drive to wake up in the morning, have a cup of coffee, and go to work. It is the drive to improve on what exists. At its worse, it is also the drive to thrive at all costs even at the expense of others.
Leviathan, a sea creature (Job 41:15 and 41:31), represents chaos. God defeated chaos but did not vanish chaos – God gave it limits (Job 38:10-11, Proverbs 8:29, Jeremiah 5:22, Psalm 104:9). God gave chaos a place in His orderly creation. Thanks to chaos we witness natural selection. Thanks to chaos many of us have met our partners – or not Thanks to chaos some humans are born with more athleticism than others and go on to become professional athletes.
Is that fair? Is it fair that after 4 years of college some of us have job offers before school ends while others may have to wait months for the right opportunity – assuming equal amounts of effort?
Job’s first lesson is that perhaps asking whether something is fair is not the point. Selfishness and chaos are not going away anytime, and unexpected and underserving outcomes will continue to be part of our lives. Railing against God because of perceived injustices is futile. 
Perhaps the correct response to the creation we are part of is to go on and create societies that care for and support those of us living through injustice.  
And where else would that willingness and energy come from if not from God?
By the way, I did go on to find a job that I love but not before internalizing that the unexpected things are not a comment on me or my abilities or my personhood. 
To those of you whose future after graduating may not pan out as expected remember that. And to those of you whose future is looking just as your dreamed and your hard work is paying off, remember to use those blessings to help our world be a little fairer.  
